A Duplication Report Concerning Race & Policing in 2016
Contributors:
Aavanth Ezhilan | Caleb Watson | Keysha Chatman | Liam Custer | Malayka Viney | Matthew O'Brien


Introduction

	The events of the 21st century have forced us to revisit the importance of the Civil Right Movement. For those unaware the American Civil Rights Movement of the 50’s and 60’s was an era in which African Americans and their allies fought to end racial segregation, discrimination, and fight for justice. Take a moment to consider that the Jim Crow Laws marginalized African Americans for almost 100 years. During the Civil Rights Movement the fight for equality in the workplace, housing, education, and the right to vote were only a few requests in regard to the advancement in ending racial segregation. Unfortunately over 60 years later the movement for racial equality continues. Though the Civil Rights Act was passed in 1964, this did not completely resolve the problem that is associated with race in America. Tensions were still high after that act was passed and this has been an underlying problem that we have seen in America coming all the way to the present day. In order to make steps in the right direction it is important that we first address the issue at hand and get a better understanding of where the problem is rooted. With this being said, and taking into consideration the racial tensions that are present in our country right now we decided to look into specifics of the 2016 presidential election which was a pivotal election for the United States.
The article that we selected was titled “Race and policing in the 2016 presidential election:Black lives matter, the police, and dog whistle politics” by Kevin Drakulich, Kevin H. Wozniak, John Hagan, Devon Johnson. This article discusses very prevalent information that is associated with major current events occurring in today’s society. It is necessary to know that in 2016 the Black Lives Matter movement was at a peak (Drakulich 2). With that being said, the presidential election was also in 2016 and so due to all the news coverage of the Black Lives Matter movement, this caused the presidential candidates to sway their platform towards the topics of race and the police force as they were also under a lot of scrutiny during the time. As a result, the 2016 presidential election brought forth competing perspectives that created an immense divide within the nation. The presidential candidates made claims that forced us to reconsider where we lie in regard to the matter of policing, the Black Lives Matter movement, and race. It's important to recognize how certain variables and viewpoints can impact a voter's likelihood to vote in the Presidential election. On page 3 of the article, the author claims that the increase in BLM warmth during this time would lead to increased voter turnout among Democrats, especially since they are generally more passionate about the Black Lives Matter movement. Subsequently, the authors suggested that Republicans would then be more swayed to support the police force as a result of Donald Trump’s polarizing statements regarding this issue, along with this we can also see that people that do support the police force would be inclined to vote for the republican side due to their outright support for the police agenda. 
This article is very important because of its implications and how it could show possible future trends in our country. The issue of race is far from resolved and is an ongoing problem in America so it is important that we see the ramifications of the conflict on society. Going back to 2012 and the case of Trayvon Martin, police brutality has been in the limelight of news and media outlets. This problem has been dragging on and in 2016 hit a peak, this led to many protests and riots of disgruntled people who were seeking change and reform. Actions were being made in the right direction for a little while until 2020 when George Floyd was murdered and this led to another set of protests and riots even larger than in 2016. This was followed up by numerous other cases of police brutality such as Breonna Taylor’s that, similarly to 2016, brought the Black Lives Matter movement and police reform to the forefront of the platforms that the 2020 United States election was being run on. With both sides keeping similar thoughts as the 2016 election we were able to see similar strategies in both the campaigns that were being run during the time. With all that being said, due to the similarities between the situations in 2020 and 2016 and the ongoing prevalence of race in America we decided that this article would be important to discuss and duplicate.
Based on the events that were occurring in 2016 along with the political party campaigns polarizing the issues at the time, we predict that the Democratic party will be warmer to the Black Lives Matter movement compared to the people that identify as a Republican. As a result of this polarization we also believe that the Republican party will be more warm to the police when compared to their Democratic counterparts. With that being said, we hypothesize based on the previously stated beliefs that police racial bias will have a negative relationship with the predicted likelihood of voting. We also believe that as people sway warmly to the Black Lives Matter movement we predict that this will have a positive relationship with the predicted likelihood of voting due to the desire for change that these voters would have and the motives that would make them want to vote. Lastly when looking at police perception we think that as the value of police perception increases, which means that people believe that the police are biased against African-American people, that this will lead to a higher predicted likelihood of voting as these people would seek change for this issue.


Data

	Our research used the same data set used by the original article, which was the 2016 ANES Time Series Study. The ANES is a national survey that asks respondents a series of questions in a myriad of categories, ranging from biographical information to political affiliations, activities, and opinions. The survey consists of a pre and post interview, referring to the US elections that take place in each survey year. 
	The original article focused on multiple independent variables, but for the scope of our research we decided to investigate three of their key variables, which presented information associated with respondent’s feelings towards police and their biases, as well as their feelings towards the social movement Black Lives Matter. This information was analyzed along partisan lines to determine if these variables had any impact on one’s likelihood of voting. The original study, however, approached some of these variables in ways that we did not fully agree with, and we decided to take an independent approach to the analysis of these variables.
Methodological Differences
	As we began dissecting the original analysis, we found a generalization within the analysis that we did not agree with, so we did not include in our replication, as we felt they misrepresented or misconstrued the claimed findings in the original paper. There were also components which we did not replicate within our research, which will have an impact on our results.
	One serious methodological change we had with the original research was the decision to not perform imputation on our data, as the original article did, “To this end, five datasets were imputed in a process that involved using all the individual level variables from the analyses as well as several auxiliary variables to add information and increase efficiency.” We decided to instead work with only the present data, both out of pureness and the fact that we did not have time or resources to deduct the datasets and perform the same imputations.
	The disagreement we had with the original paper was the identification of one’s political party, and how this was used to analyze the differences between the two groups. The groups in question are those of the two major political parties in the US, Democrats and Republicans. The original paper describes their process as follows: “The control for two measures of political beliefs: identification as more liberal or conservative and identification as more Democrat or Republican.” The original article uses unspecified means to make more generalized definitions of Democrat and Republican, which include not only their party identification, but also their political ideology. We chose not to do this, as the subsequent analysis refers to these groups solely by their party affiliation, without consideration to their ideology. We felt that, if the research was specifically interested in the differences across party lines, as they are in their analysis, then only party affiliation should determine which side an individual sits on. 
	In terms of conduct of analysis, we also made two changes compared to the original which may affect our results. The first is a consequence of our decision to not perform some form of imputation, which led us to excluding NA values from our results. We chose to specifically exclude them as the ANES codes NA values among many different variables, and for ease and time we chose to exclude the variables rather than recode and reuse them. Along with this, we found that excluding all NA values on each variable resulted in a significant smaller sample size than the original paper, and in a decision to try and get a closer sample to the original, we instead performed individual logistic regressions on each variable and excluded NA values for the independent variable in each, rather than doing a single regression encompassing all variables.
	We ultimately chose to make these changes out of both disagreement and inability to replicate, either due to vagueness in the measures or actions taken, or simply out of the steps being taken beyond our level of knowledge, and we recognized that our analysis would likely differ from the original, despite originating from the same dataset. With that being considered, we moved on to our actual research and analysis.
Analysis
In order to begin gathering data for the duplication, we started by identifying variables which we were most interested in attempting to research. We chose to try and recreate the data represented in the first few graphs, which showed a temperature scale for BLM and Police on a scale of 0 to 100, and Police bias on a scale of 1 to 7, with 1 being white bias, 4 being neutral, and 7 being black bias. We used those as our independent variables, and the probability of voting as the dependent variable, broken apart into two groups based on the respondent’s self identified political party.
For each group, we performed an individual logistic regression on each independent variable, excluding all NA values present in the variable. The results of each regression were then graphed, with a line representing the regression, and a gray shaded area representing a 95% confidence interval for the line. We also produced histograms for each variable to represent the number of respondents within our samples that gave each answer, which we used to clarify questions we had about where and how respondents from each party were distributed among the potential answers.
	

Results

	We found that in a slightly smaller sample size of about seventeen hundred, the results were not the same as that of the authors findings. However, we cannot say that the authors' findings were statistically insignificant. We found that Republican Police Warmth has strong statistical evidence to show correlation with likelihood of voting. Additionally, some of the rest of our results displayed moderate evidence of correlation between variables but not quite enough to suggest correlation. We will examine each of these variables in depth and compare our variable visualizations and summaries produced to that of the authors. All visualizations will be produced by R, just as the authors originally used. All variables are shown as predictors of our dependent variable, probability of voting, which was converted to log odds for the purpose of our visualizations.
	
Variable Name
Estimate
Std. Error
Z Value
P Value
Dem. Police Bias
-0.05535
0.15260  
-0.363    
0.717    
Rep. Police Bias
-6.773e-16
1.452e-1
0.000        
1
Dem. BLM Warmth
0.004741   
0.003870   
1.225    
0.221    
Rep. BLM Warmth
-0.005826   
0.004830  
-1.206    
0.228    
Dem. Police Warmth
0.004227
0.004059
1.041
0.298
Rep. Police Warmth
0.016005   
0.005866   
2.729  
0.00636**

    *Represents p < .05
	As shown above, the only relationship we can observe that is strong enough to be deemed statistically significant is “Republican Police Warmth” with the lowest p-value of any of our variables. This doesn’t necessarily prove causation between Republican Police Warmth and Voting likelihood, but it does show strong evidence for correlation. All of the other variables have too high of p values to suggest that the relationship shown is statistically significant. In the case of BLM Warmth for both parties, and Democrat police warmth we can say that there is SOME relationship shown. That being a positive correlation among Democrats and negative correlation among Republicans. However, due to the generally high p-values of anywhere from .22 to .3 we cannot say that this relationship shown is significant. The rest of our relationships shown through the logistic regression table have much too high p values of .7 and up. In general our findings from this table tell us that the only significant variable that we found to be associated with likelihood of voting is Police Warmth as a Republican. Now that we have determined what relationships are significant, and duplicated the logistic regression table, we must attempt to duplicate the visualizations. We will do so individually for each variable, respectively.
  
  
Support for BLM

	To outline what is meant by “Support for Blm” we refer back to the ANES codebook. The participants were asked “How would you rate the black lives matter movement?” on a scale of one to one hundred, one being extremely cold and one hundred being extremely warm. Originally, in the authors explanation of their findings on this variable's relationship with likelihood of voting they state that there is a significant positive correlation in Democrats and a significant Negative correlation for republicans. This statement is furthermore supported by their visualizations that were produced as shown below: 
	
Figure 1: Original Article’s BLM Warmth Graph
	Our findings display slightly different results than theirs, but not to say that the authors original findings are necessarily wrong, because they’re not. Our findings are displayed below in Figure 2 and the authors’ above in Figure 1. We found that in both Democrats and Republicans there is very little to no statistically significant relationship between likelihood of voting and BLM warmth. The confidence intervals produced as shown below are nearly identical to that of the authors. So there is a SOME sort of relationship shown in the visualizations we produced, and in fact the relationships we found are even aligning with that of the original study, but because the relationship is so “weak” or lacking strong association we cannot say that the authors original findings are correct in every manner. The sample size that the authors used simply have more variance than that of ours, which have produced a set of visualizations that also have more variance than that of our own. This explains the lack of statistical relationship in our BLM warmth graphs as compared to the authors. This may be contradictory to what you have been traditionally taught in statistics. We hypothesize that due to the polarity of the answers used in the study, this leads to the increase in variance in the authors findings.

Figure 2: Republican BLM Warmth (Left) and Democrat BLM Warmth (Right)


Support for Police

The graph in Figure 3 shown below displays the relationship between support for the police and probability of voting in the 2016 election. The support for the police was based on a scale of 1-100 and was asked to the participants of the ANES survey. We categorized democrats as self-identified democrats and republicans as self-identified republicans. We did not take into account how liberal or conservative a person was because we did not want to assume their political affiliation based on their political ideologies even though we understand they overlap at times.
	
Figure 3: Original Article’s Police Warmth Graph
	As you can see in Figure 3, as a democrat is more warm to the police, there is little to no change in their probability of voting. This makes sense because the article supports the fact that democrats are less supportive of the police as compared to the republicans so we can expect to see no correlation between their probability of voting due to an increase in police support. For republicans on the other hand, we can see a largely positive correlation between the support for the police and their probability of voting. There is a strong upward trend in the graph, going from below 50 percent to around 80 percent. This strong evidence of correlation supports the original data that the author showed in his graph. This makes us believe that there is strong evidence to support the fact that Republicans that are more supportive of the police are more likely to vote. In our duplication of this chart as shown below in Figure 4, the main differences we see are very minimal. For the democratic line, in our duplication they are both very straight but our visualizations minimum values were higher. For the duplication of the republican graph we see that the trend is very similar, yet the confidence interval when the police warmth is low is a lot larger than the graph from the article which means there is the possibility for an outlier or multiple. Aside from that, these two graphs were very similar to the ones that the author’s constructed and in fact, our confidence intervals even capture the graph that the authors produced.


Figure 4: Republican Police Warmth (Left) and Democrat Police Warmth (Right)
	
	The frequency distributions as shown below in Figure 5 outline the same findings displayed in our previous visualizations. To be a republican who feels cold towards police in general is very uncommon, which could very well explain the evidence of correlation shown in our visualizations. However, considering our p-value of .05 this variable has a stronger relationship than that of any other we have presented so far, and most definitely low enough to suggest that the relationship is statistically significant.

Figure 5: Republican (Left) and Democrat (Right) Police Warmth Response Frequencies


Perceptions on Police Bias

	The variables that go into the chart below that was located in the article that we duplicated are probability of voting and perceptions of police bias. Perceptions of police bias was a question asked to the ANES participants where they were able to give a number 1-7 to show their perception of police bias in America at the time. Answers in the 1-3 range are answers that claim the police are biased towards white people. Answers that are 4 mean that there is no bias by police. Answers that range from 5-7 mean that the participants feel that the police force is biased towards black people. The author separated these log odds based on political affiliation based on identifying as either a republican or a democrat. The original article found, as you can see by the graph in Figure 6, that as republican police bias went up, which meant they thought the police favored black people, their probability decreased. The opposite is true for the democrats, as their perception of police bias increased, their probability of voting increased as well based on log odds. The republican and democrats have an inverse relationship which makes sense since this political election was very polarizing.
	
Figure 6: Original Article’s Police Bias Graph

	Our duplicated graphs are shown below in Figure 7. As you can see, our graphs are not exactly the same as the article’s. This could be due to the smaller sample size or different weights given to different variables when making the log odds graph. In our comparison of police racial bias and probability of voting for republicans, we found there to be little to no change as police racial bias increases, this is different from the original article which finds that as police racial bias increases for republicans they are more likely to vote. In our next graph we see that democratic racial bias vs. voting also has little change but there seems to be a slight downward trend. This is different from the original as the original had positive association between the two variables for democrats. Due to the reasoning above and the confidence intervals we cannot assume that the author is wrong as there are multiple variables that could have skewed the data, overall we do not have enough evidence to disprove what the author claims.

Figure 7: Republican (Left) and Democrat (Right) Perceived Police Bias
	The wide confidence interval in Figure 7 can be explained by the frequency distributions shown below. This is due to there being a lack of responses for the categories of five through seven, as shown in Figure 8. Due to both the lack of responses as shown in the frequency distribution and the smaller sample size used our graphs had much less variance and much higher minimum values. 

Figure 8: Republican (Left) and Democrat (Right) Police Warmth Response Frequencies

Conclusion

           The BLM movement and politics is a known escalated issue that worked hand in hand with the 2016 presidential election. Evidence supported the hypothesis that these effects would have a negative relationship with the predicted likelihood of voting. Subsequently, the movement had the effect of drawing more voters that wanted change, socially and politically. This not only affected the democratic or republican party individually but overall helped voter turnout due to the current events that were going on during the time. The smaller sample size made it somewhat harder to receive the exact same models as the original but when we look at the trends and compare the two we can see distinct similarities which includes the confidence intervals. Each party was able to decide whether they were partial to the BLM and police brutality that occurred during the election. When considering how things were handled during this period, it is evident that Civil Rights implications and racist attitudes had a huge impact on the election in 2016. The methodological differences we acquired in this empirical data assisted in proving how these racial stereotypical acts decided how the future would be for America’s election. Change was sought to decrease the chance of these issues occurring again to the African American people. It all correlates hand in hand to the importance of treating everyone equally and ethically the same no matter the race.

Works Cited
Drakulich, K., Wozniak, K. H., Hagan, J., & Johnson, D. (2020). Race and policing in the 2016 presidential election: Black lives matter, the police, and dog whistle politics. Criminology (Beverly Hills), 58(2), 370–402. https://doi.org/10.1111/1745-9125.12239

